chore(docs): adding-search-with-algolia -> Improved documentation (#25156)
gatsbyjs/gatsby: docs/docs/adding-search-with-algolia.md

## Setting up the project

This guide will set up a search based on the [Gatsby starter blog](/starters/gatsbyjs/gatsby-starter-blog/). You can of course base it on your own project instead, but that might require minor modifications to the code, depending on your page structure and the frameworks you use.

Create a new site using

```shell
gatsby new gatsby-algolia-guide https://github.com/gatsbyjs/gatsby-starter-blog
```

The starter blog contains the pages you will index in the directory `content/blog`. These are Markdown files that have the [frontmatter field](/docs/adding-markdown-pages/#frontmatter-for-metadata-in-markdown-files) `title`. It is referenced when configuring the Algolia query. If you call this field something else, the query needs to be modified.

## Indexing

Now that you have a project set up you can proceed to indexing your pages in Algolia.

Start by adding the [Algolia plugin](https://github.com/algolia/gatsby-plugin-algolia):

```shell

> npm install --save gatsby-plugin-algolia

Reviewer: no save is needed
```suggestion
npm install gatsby-plugin-algolia
```

require("dotenv").config()
```

Then add the configuration for `gatsby-plugin-algolia` to the list of `plugin`s in the `gatsby-config.js`. `dotenv` has made the configuration values available as keys in `process.env`.

```js:title=gatsby-config.js
  plugins: [
    ... // your existing plugins here
    {
      resolve: `gatsby-plugin-algolia`,
      options: {
        appId: process.env.GATSBY_ALGOLIA_APP_ID,
        apiKey: process.env.ALGOLIA_ADMIN_KEY,
        queries: require("./src/utils/algolia-queries")
      },
    }
  ],
}
```

### Query the pages for indexing

You still need to supply a `queries` configuration. Queries tell the Algolia plugin what data is to be indexed. They perform GraphQL queries for the relevant pages and convert the response into a set of Algolia records. These contain key/value pairs with the data to be indexed.

The configuration could have been entered straight into the `gatsby-config.js`, but the configuration above loads it from a new file `src/utils/algolia-queries.js` to avoid clutter. Create this page in your project:

```js:title=src/utils/algolia-queries.js
const pageQuery = `{
  pages: allMarkdownRemark(
    filter: {

>       fileAbsolutePath: { regex: "/${pagePath.replace("/", "/")}/" },

Reviewer 2: This throws an error, since there is no `pagePath` defined.

Author: Sorry, I managed to lose the two first lines with constants during the rewrite to work with starter-blog. I added them back now. Anyway, at the beginning of the file it should say `const pagePath = "content"

Reviewer: `.replace("/", "/")`

what is the meaning of this? I think it not changes the value?

Did you mean this?

```suggestion
      fileAbsolutePath: { regex: "/${pagePath}/".replace("//", "/") },
```

Author: No that's of course nonsense. I also just noticed. I think the backslash got lost when I copied the code back and forth. 

I meant `regex: "/${pagePath.replace("/", "\\/")}/"` The idea is that the regexp should work correctly even if the path contains a forward slash.

Reviewer: Is there not a Gatsby until or a npm package for unifying this kind of slashes? 

I expected more a removing for double slashes if pagePath already includes slashes at start or at the end

Reviewer: even the it should be?

```javascript
"/${pagePath.replace("\\", "/")}/"
```

Reviewer: If you do this to escape the slash then I remember you need only to escape it with `\/` when you assign the regex direct:

```javascript
const regex = /path\/file/ig 
```

But if it is in a string then you don’t need to escape and don’t include the slash at start and end:

```javascript 
const regexstring = "path/file"
const regex = new RegExp(regexstring)
```

i am a little confused. Maybe I am wrong 🤷‍♂️

Reviewer: it seems i am wrong: i looked only at the diff and i did not see that this code snippet is inside a graphql query 🤦

Author: Yeah, it's a mess with these double and triple quotes. I found the library you mentioned (`escape-string-regexp`) and added it instead. Using it makes more explicit what the code is trying to achieve and in case someone names their blog directory `[a-z]` it will still work...

However, I also noticed after a bit of head scratching that `packages/gatsby/src/utils/prepare-regex.ts` works both with double quoting and without (though searching for double backslashes is probably broken :D). So just dropping in the raw `pagePath` works, though it looks broken.

    }
  ) {
    edges {
      node {
        id
        frontmatter {
          title
        }
        fields {
          slug
        }
        excerpt(pruneLength: 5000)
      }
    }
  }
}`

function pageToAlgoliaRecord({ node: { id, frontmatter, fields, ...rest } }) {
  return {
    objectID: id,
    ...frontmatter,
    ...fields,
    ...rest,
  }
}

const queries = [
  {
    query: pageQuery,
    transformer: ({ data }) => data.pages.edges.map(pageToAlgoliaRecord),

>     indexName,

Reviewer 2: This throws an error for me: `ReferenceError: indexName is not defined`

Author: Part of the same two lost lines as `pagePath`; should be `const indexName = "Pages"`

## Adding the user interface

Now that there is data in the index, it is time to build the user interface for searching. It will display as a magnifying glass icon button that, when clicked, expands into a form field. Search results will appear in a popover below the input field as the user types.

The guide will use the following frameworks:

- [React InstantSearch](https://community.algolia.com/react-instantsearch), a component library provided by Algolia for easily building search interfaces.
- [Algolia Search](https://www.npmjs.com/package/algoliasearch) provides the API client for calling Algolia.
- [Styled Components](https://styled-components.com) for embedding the CSS in the code, integrated using the [Gatsby styled component plugin](/packages/gatsby-plugin-styled-components/).
- [Styled Icons](https://styled-icons.js.org/) provides the magnifying glass icon for the search bar.

Styled Components can also be replaced by any other CSS solution you prefer.

Install these frameworks by running the following command:

```shell

> npm install --save react-instantsearch-dom algoliasearch styled-components gatsby-plugin-styled-components @styled-icons/fa-solid

Reviewer: ```suggestion
npm install react-instantsearch-dom algoliasearch styled-components gatsby-plugin-styled-components @styled-icons/fa-solid
```

## Adding the user interface

Now that there is data in the index, it is time to build the user interface for searching. It will display as a magnifying glass icon button that, when clicked, expands into a form field. Search results will appear in a popover below the input field as the user types.

The guide will use the following frameworks:

- [React InstantSearch](https://community.algolia.com/react-instantsearch), a component library provided by Algolia for easily building search interfaces.
- [Algolia Search](https://www.npmjs.com/package/algoliasearch) provides the API client for calling Algolia.
- [Styled Components](https://styled-components.com) for embedding the CSS in the code, integrated using the [Gatsby styled component plugin](/packages/gatsby-plugin-styled-components/).
- [Styled Icons](https://styled-icons.js.org/) provides the magnifying glass icon for the search bar.

Styled Components can also be replaced by any other CSS solution you prefer.

Install these frameworks by running the following command:

```shell

> npm install react-instantsearch-dom algoliasearch styled-components gatsby-plugin-styled-components @styled-icons/fa-solid

Reviewer 2: Does `gtasby-plugin-styled-components` need to be included in the `gatsby-config` file? That was in the earlier version of this doc.

Author: Good point. Strangely, it seems to work fine without it (I've been testing without it), but it really ought to be there. I'll add it.

This does mean the tutorial makes you change the `gatsby-config` twice, but I think that's preferable to having to mention the styled components in the "configuring algolia" section.

The `PageHit` component is responsible for displaying a single page ("hit") in a search result.

[`connectStateResults`](https://community.algolia.com/react-instantsearch/connectors/connectStateResults.html) wraps components to provide them with details about the current search such as the query, the number of results and timing statistics.

If you're using Algolia's free tier, they ask you to acknowledge the use of their technology by including the string "Powered by Algolia", which is what `PoweredBy` does.

`Highlight` and `Snippet` both display attributes of matching search results to the user. The former renders the full value whereas the latter only shows a snippet. A snippet is the text immediately surrounding the match. The `attribute` property is the name of the key in the Algolia index (as generated by `pageToAlgoliaRecord` in `algolia-queries.js`).

### Tying the search widget together

You now need to hook up the two components to each other and perform the actual search:

> ```jsx:title=src/components/search/index.js

Reviewer 2: `search/index.js` has already been defined in this project, should this have a different name? Ideally there should be minimal revisiting of the same file in a reference guide.

Author: No worries!

  -webkit-overflow-scrolling: touch;
  position: absolute;
  z-index: 2;
  right: 0;
  top: 100%;
  margin-top: 0.5em;
  width: 80vw;
  max-width: 30em;
  box-shadow: 0 0 5px 0;
  padding: 1em;
  border-radius: 2px;
  background: ${({ theme }) => theme.background};
`

export default styled(SearchResult)`
  display: ${props => (props.show ? `block` : `none`)};
  ${Popover}

  .HitCount {
    display: flex;
    justify-content: flex-end;
  }

  .Hits {
    ul {
      list-style: none;
      margin-left: 0;
    }

    li.ais-Hits-item {
      margin-bottom: 1em;

      a {
        color: ${({ theme }) => theme.foreground};

        h4 {
          margin-bottom: 0.2em;
        }
      }
    }
  }

  .ais-PoweredBy {
    display: flex;
    justify-content: flex-end;
    font-size: 80%;

    svg {
      width: 70px;
    }
  }
`
```

`Popover` creates a popover floating under the search box. The `show` property determines whether it is visible or not.

## Usage

The search widget is now ready for use. It needs to be placed somewhere in your project's layout. If you start from Gatsby starter block, you can use the `layout` component:

```jsx:title=src/components/layout.js

> ...

Reviewer 2: What's the significance of this ellipsis? `import React` is typically the first line of a component file, so this seems like it could cause confusion more than anything...?

Author: Eagle eyes! It's also from before I switched to the blog starter where the file was longer and I needed to shorten it. I removed the ellipsis.

Reviewer 2: You can count on me to catch those things! haha. Thanks for updating it!

Copy out the Application ID, Search-Only API Key, and Admin API Key from Algolia and create a file called `.env` in the root of your project (`gatsby-algolia-guide` if created as described above). This file contains your [project environment variables](/docs/environment-variables). Replace the placeholders with your copied values:

```text:title=.env
GATSBY_ALGOLIA_APP_ID=<App ID>
GATSBY_ALGOLIA_SEARCH_KEY=<Search-Only API Key>
ALGOLIA_ADMIN_KEY=<Admin API Key>
```

Note that the value of the Admin Key must be kept secret, since it allows write access to your index. It must therefore not be included in any code you ship.

It is also best practice not to check in the `.env` file for this reason. Consider creating an `.env.example` without the values to git instead. This way, if someone else sets up the project, they know what configuration they need to supply but don't have access to your private values.

Next, modify `gatsby-config.js` to read the configuration and add the `gatsby-plugin-algolia` plugin.

Add the following line at the top of `gatsby-config.js` to read the configuration from `.env`:

```js:title=gatsby-config.js
require("dotenv").config()
```

> Then add the configuration for `gatsby-plugin-algolia` to the list of `plugin`s in the `gatsby-config.js`. `dotenv` has made the configuration values available as keys in `process.env`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Then add the configuration for `gatsby-plugin-algolia` to the list of plugins in the `gatsby-config.js`. `dotenv` makes the configuration values available as keys in `process.env`.
```
This read a little funny in my last run-through, so adding a suggestion.

```js:title=gatsby-config.js
  plugins: [
    ... // your existing plugins here
    {
      resolve: `gatsby-plugin-algolia`,
      options: {
        appId: process.env.GATSBY_ALGOLIA_APP_ID,
        apiKey: process.env.ALGOLIA_ADMIN_KEY,
        queries: require("./src/utils/algolia-queries")
      },
    }
  ],
}
```

### Query the pages for indexing

You still need to supply a `queries` configuration. Queries tell the Algolia plugin what data is to be indexed. They perform GraphQL queries for the relevant pages and convert the response into a set of Algolia records. These contain key/value pairs with the data to be indexed.

The configuration could have been entered straight into the `gatsby-config.js`, but the configuration above loads it from a new file `src/utils/algolia-queries.js` to avoid clutter. Create this page in your project:

```js:title=src/utils/algolia-queries.js

> const escapeStringRegexp = require("escape-string-regexp")

Reviewer 2: Doesn't this require an npm install as well?

Author: Gatsby already includes this library so it will be available to the project code. You can argue that it should nevertheless explicitly declare that it uses it directly, but I don't think it's worth complicating the tutorial for it. 

Since we figured out it will generally work without escaping, too, we could consider dropping the escaping completely if you think it complicates the story.

  }
}

const queries = [
  {
    query: pageQuery,
    transformer: ({ data }) => data.pages.edges.map(pageToAlgoliaRecord),
    indexName,
    settings: { attributesToSnippet: [`excerpt:20`] },
  },
]

module.exports = queries
```

If you did not start from the Gatsby start blog, you might need to modify the `pagePath` to match where your content is kept.

The file exports a list of queries. Each query defines a single index. You can build [multiple indices](https://www.algolia.com/doc/guides/sending-and-managing-data/prepare-your-data/in-depth/choosing-between-one-or-more-indices/) with Algolia but this guide will only use a single one.

Each index requires a GraphQL query that retrieves the pages and data to be indexed. A `transformer` transforms the GraphQL data to an Algolia record.

Each index has a name that identifies it. If the index does not exist, it will be created automatically during indexing.

Note that each record must have an ID in the key `objectID`. The Algolia documentation provides more information on [how to structure data into records](https://www.algolia.com/doc/guides/sending-and-managing-data/prepare-your-data/#attributes---what-to-put-in-your-record).

> Here, only the field `excerpt` and the frontmatter field `title` are indexed. It will display both fields in the search results. To index more fields, add them to `pageQuery` with GraphQL.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In this guide, the slug, field `excerpt`, and frontmatter field `title` are indexed. It will display these fields in the search results. To index more fields, add them to `pageQuery` with GraphQL.
```

```jsx:title=src/components/search/styled-search-result.js
import styled, { css } from "styled-components"
import SearchResult from "./search-result"

const Popover = css`
  max-height: 80vh;
  overflow: scroll;
  -webkit-overflow-scrolling: touch;
  position: absolute;
  z-index: 2;
  right: 0;
  top: 100%;
  margin-top: 0.5em;
  width: 80vw;
  max-width: 30em;
  box-shadow: 0 0 5px 0;
  padding: 1em;
  border-radius: 2px;
  background: ${({ theme }) => theme.background};
`

export default styled(SearchResult)`
  display: ${props => (props.show ? `block` : `none`)};
  ${Popover}

  .HitCount {
    display: flex;
    justify-content: flex-end;
  }

  .Hits {
    ul {
      list-style: none;
      margin-left: 0;
    }

    li.ais-Hits-item {
      margin-bottom: 1em;

      a {
        color: ${({ theme }) => theme.foreground};

        h4 {
          margin-bottom: 0.2em;
        }
      }
    }
  }

  .ais-PoweredBy {
    display: flex;
    justify-content: flex-end;
    font-size: 80%;

    svg {
      width: 70px;
    }
  }
`
```

`Popover` creates a popover floating under the search box. The `show` property determines whether it is visible or not.

## Usage

> The search widget is now ready for use. It needs to be placed somewhere in your project's layout. If you start from Gatsby starter block, you can use the `layout` component:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The search widget is now ready for use. It needs to be placed somewhere in your project's layout. If you start from Gatsby starter blog, you can use the `layout` component:
```

title: Adding Search with Algolia
---

This guide will run you through the process of setting up a custom search experience powered by [Algolia](https://www.algolia.com) on a Gatsby site.

## What is Algolia?

Algolia is a hosted search API that provides you with the components you need to build powerful search functionality without setting up your own server.

> Algolia will host the search index for you. Send the information that you want to search to Algolia for inclusion in the index. You can then use their APIs to perform a search using the index.

Author: I just think it's worth communicating that there is an explicit indexing step during which it is all sent to Algolia and it's actually kept there and does not update unless you re-index. I'll add your suggestion but try to work in the concept of an indexing step too.

Algolia provides a free tier that offers a limited number of monthly searches. A paid plan is required for higher volumes.

## Indexing and searching

There are two stages to providing search functionality: indexing your pages and building a search interface for users to query the index.

The [Gatsby Algolia plugin](https://github.com/algolia/gatsby-plugin-algolia) handles the indexing. It sends your pages to Algolia for indexing every time you run `gatsby build`. You use GraphQL to customize which pages and what information to index.

To build the user interface for searching, this tutorial will use [React InstantSearch](https://www.algolia.com/doc/guides/building-search-ui/getting-started/react/), which is a library provided by Algolia with ready-made React components. This is the quickest way to get up and running, but you could also build your own custom user interface.

> Note: If you want to build a search for technical documentation, Algolia provides a product called [DocSearch](https://docsearch.algolia.com/) that simplifies the process further and eliminates the need for manual indexing. This is the preferred approach for documentation sites.

## Setting up the project

> This guide will show you how to set up a search based on the [Gatsby starter](https://www.gatsbyjs.org/starters/gatsbyjs/gatsby-starter-default/). You can of course base it on your own project instead, but that might require minor modifications to the code, depending on your page structure and the frameworks you use.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This guide will show you how to set up a search based on the [Gatsby starter](/starters/gatsbyjs/gatsby-starter-default/). You can of course base it on your own project instead, but that might require minor modifications to the code, depending on your page structure and the frameworks you use.
```

```js:title=gatsby-config.js
  plugins: [
    ... // your existing plugins here
    {
      resolve: `gatsby-plugin-algolia`,
      options: {
        appId: process.env.GATSBY_ALGOLIA_APP_ID,
        apiKey: process.env.ALGOLIA_ADMIN_KEY,
        queries: require("./src/utils/algolia-queries")
      },
    }
  ],
}
```

### Query the pages for indexing

You still need to supply `queries` configuration. Queries tell the Algolia plugin what data is to be indexed. They perform GraphQL queries for the relevant pages and convert the response into a set of Algolia records. These contain key/value pairs with the data to be indexed.

This could have been entered straight into the `gatsby-config.js`, but to avoid clutter the configuration above loads it from the file `src/utils/algolia-queries.js`.

```js:title=src/utils/algolia-queries.js
const pagePath = "src/markdown-pages"
const indexName = "Pages"

const pageQuery = `{
  pages: allMarkdownRemark(
    filter: {
      fileAbsolutePath: { regex: "/${pagePath.replace("/", "/")}/" },
    }
  ) {
    edges {
      node {

>         id

Reviewer 2: The text below says "each record must have an ID in the key `objectID`", and it throws an error without it. So this needs to stay.
```suggestion
        objectID: id
```

  },
]

module.exports = queries
```

The file exports a list of queries. Each query defines a single index. You can build [multiple indices](https://www.algolia.com/doc/guides/sending-and-managing-data/prepare-your-data/in-depth/choosing-between-one-or-more-indices/) with Algolia but this tutorial will only use a single one.

Each index requires a GraphQL query that retrieves the pages and data to be indexed. A `transformer` transforms the GraphQL data to an Algolia record.

Note that each record must have an ID in the key `objectID`. The Algolia documentation provides more information on [how to structure data into records](https://www.algolia.com/doc/guides/sending-and-managing-data/prepare-your-data/#attributes---what-to-put-in-your-record).

Here, only the frontmatter field `title` and the field `excerpt` are indexed. We will display both fields in the search results. To index more fields, just add them to `pageQuery`.

Each query has optional [settings](https://www.algolia.com/doc/api-reference/settings-api-parameters/). The code above tells Algolia we will want to generate "snippets" of context around our hits in the `excerpt` attribute.

### Test your indexing

> This should complete the indexing setup. Now run `gatsby build`. If all goes well, the output should include the following:

Reviewer 2: When I try to run a build at this point with a new Algolia account, I get this error:

```
AlgoliaSearchError: Method not allowed with this API key
```
Is there some kind of limit with free accounts, or something else I need to set up?

Reviewer 2: What permissions does your search-only API key have? I didn't have the ability to edit it, so I made a new one and gave it search and browse permissions...but it still gave me the same error. I added a few more that seemed related (addObject, editSettings, usage) and no difference. I'm using the Application ID and search-only API key (or this new custom key) from my new Algolia account.

Author: I think I figured it out: I think you added the "Search-Only API Key
" as ALGOLIA_ADMIN_KEY. The search-only key only has read permissions but the admin key needs write permission since it's used for indexing. 

I get the same message as you (`AlgoliaSearchError: Method not allowed with this API key`) if I swap them.

If this is the issue I'll add it to the troubleshooting section!

Reviewer: I think this should go better into the section „### Configuring the Algolia plugin“ where you write about setting up an API key. There you can write which permission a key needs.

 If I am a new user and have to setup permissions it takes always to much time to look into docs and/or google for infos which are the minimal needed settings.

Author: There shouldn't be any need to configure anything; you only need to create an account. The keys are all generated when you create the account. 

But we need to explain what that message means in case you put the keys in the wrong environment variables. (If Marcy verifies this was the issue)

Reviewer 2: That seems to have been the issue.... I've been having problems with dotenv on my machine so I put the api keys directly in `gatsby-config`, and `apiKey` wasn't specific enough I guess! I've left comments on the other errors being thrown now that I seem to have gotten past this step. thanks!

Algolia: 1 queries to index
Algolia: query 0: executing query
Algolia: query 0: graphql resulted in 1 records
Algolia: query 0: splitting in 1 jobs
Algolia: query 0: moving copied index to main index
```

Check that "graphql resulted in" is followed by the number of pages you created. If the number is wrong, there is something wrong with your query.

Log in to your Algolia account, go to "Indices" and then select the "Page" index and you should see your indexed page data.

![Algolia index displaying the indexed page](./images/algolia-index.png)

### Troubleshooting

If you get the error `GraphQLError: Field "fileAbsolutePath" is not defined by type MarkdownRemarkFilterInput` it means that no pages were found in your project. Check the path configured for `gatsby-source-filesystem` and the query.

Algolia has an upper bound of 10KB for an index entry. If you get the error `AlgoliaSearchError: Record at the position XX objectID=xx-xx-xx-xx-xx is too big size=xxxx bytes` it means you exceeded that limit. Note how the excerpts are pruned to 5000 characters in the query. Make sure you prune long fields and don't index unnecessary data.

## Adding the user interface

> Now that there is data in the index, it is time to build the user interface for searching. It will display as a magnifying glass icon that, when clicked, expands into an input field. Search results will appear in a popover below the input field as the user types.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now that there is data in the index, it is time to build the user interface for searching. It will display as a magnifying glass icon button that, when clicked, expands into a form field. Search results will appear in a popover below the input field as the user types.
```

I need to get past a build error to test out all of this, but we should avoid encouraging accessibility antipatterns in Gatsby docs. Icons aren't interactive elements, so they should be wrapped in buttons. I can help see that part through once I've resolved my blocking Algolia error.

The tutorial will use the following frameworks:

- [React InstantSearch](https://community.algolia.com/react-instantsearch), a component library provided by Algolia for easily building search interfaces.
- [Algolia Search](https://www.npmjs.com/package/algoliasearch) provides the API client for calling Algolia.

> - [Styled Components](https://styled-components.com) for embedding the CSS in the code, integrated using the [Gatsby styled component plugin](https://www.gatsbyjs.org/packages/gatsby-plugin-styled-components/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Styled Components](https://styled-components.com) for embedding the CSS in the code, integrated using the [Gatsby styled component plugin](/packages/gatsby-plugin-styled-components/).
```

> - [Styled Icons](https://styled-icons.js.org/) provides the magnifying glass icon for our search bar.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [Styled Icons](https://styled-icons.js.org/) provides the magnifying glass icon for the search bar.
```

> Styled components can of course be replaced by any other CSS solution you prefer.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Styled Components can also be replaced by any other CSS solution you prefer.
```

The `PageHit` component is responsible for displaying a single page ("hit") in a search result.

[`connectStateResults`](https://community.algolia.com/react-instantsearch/connectors/connectStateResults.html) wraps components to provide them with details about the current search such as the query, the number of results and timing statistics.

If you're using Algolia's free tier, they ask you to acknowledge the use of their technology by including the string "Powered by Algolia", which is what `PoweredBy` does.

`Highlight` and `Snippet` both display attributes of matching search results to the user. The former renders the full value whereas the latter only shows a snippet. A snippet is the text immediately surrounding the match. The `attribute` property is the name of the key in the Algolia index (as generated by `pageToAlgoliaRecord` in `algolia-queries.js`).

### Tying the search widget together

> That was essentially it! We now only need to hook up the two components to each other and perform the actual search:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You now need to hook up the two components to each other and perform the actual search:
```

  const rootRef = createRef()
  const [query, setQuery] = useState()
  const [hasFocus, setFocus] = useState(false)
  const searchClient = algoliasearch(
    process.env.GATSBY_ALGOLIA_APP_ID,
    process.env.GATSBY_ALGOLIA_SEARCH_KEY
  )

  useClickOutside(rootRef, () => setFocus(false))

  return (
    <ThemeProvider theme={theme}>
      <StyledSearchRoot ref={rootRef}>
        <InstantSearch
          searchClient={searchClient}
          indexName={indices[0].name}
          onSearchStateChange={({ query }) => setQuery(query)}
        >
          <StyledSearchBox onFocus={() => setFocus(true)} hasFocus={hasFocus} />
          <StyledSearchResult
            show={query && query.length > 0 && hasFocus}
            indices={indices}
          />
        </InstantSearch>
      </StyledSearchRoot>
    </ThemeProvider>
  )
}
```

The `ThemeProvider` exports variables for the CSS to use (this is the [theming](https://styled-components.com/docs/advanced#theming) functionality of `styled-components`). If you are using `styled-components` elsewhere in your project you probably want to place it at the root of your widget hierarchy rather than in the search widget itself.

> The `hasFocus` variable tracks whether the search box is currently in focus. When it is, it should display the input field (if not, only the search icon is visible).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `hasFocus` variable tracks whether the search box is currently in focus. When it is, it should display the input field (if not, only the search icon button is visible).
```

`StyledSearchRoot` is the root of the whole component. The React hook `useClickOutside` provides a callback if the user clicks anywhere else on the page, in which case it should close.

`InstantSearch` from [`react-instantsearch-dom`](https://community.algolia.com/react-instantsearch) wraps the search box and search results to orchestrate the search.

### Supporting files

> Almost done! Only some supporting files left. We need to add the implementation of the `useClickOutside` hook:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Almost done! Only some supporting files left. You need to add the implementation of the `useClickOutside` hook:
```

```jsx:title=src/components/search/use-click-outside.js
import { useEffect } from "react"

const events = [`mousedown`, `touchstart`]

export default (ref, onClickOutside) => {
  const isOutside = element => !ref.current || !ref.current.contains(element)

  const onClick = event => {
    if (isOutside(event.target)) {
      onClickOutside()
    }
  }

  useEffect(() => {
    for (const event of events) {
      document.addEventListener(event, onClick)
    }

    return () => {
      for (const event of events) document.removeEventListener(event, onClick)
    }
  })
}
```

> And finally we should also add some CSS. The `Styled` components wrap the components we wrote earlier to add styling to them. If you wish to use a different CSS framework, you can skip these. In that case, replace `StyledSearchBox` with `SearchBox`, `StyledSearchResult` with `SearchResult` and `StyledSearchRoot` with `<div>` in `index.js`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
And finally, you should also add some CSS. The `Styled` components wrap the components you wrote earlier to add styling to them. If you wish to use a different CSS framework, you can skip these. In that case, replace `StyledSearchBox` with `SearchBox`, `StyledSearchResult` with `SearchResult` and `StyledSearchRoot` with `<div>` in `index.js`.
```

```jsx:title=src/components/search/styled-search-root.js
import styled from "styled-components"

export default styled.div`
  position: relative;
  margin: 0.6em 0;
`
```

> The root element needs relative positioning so we can position the popover underneath it.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The root element needs relative positioning so you can position the popover underneath it.
```

```jsx:title=src/components/search/styled-search-result.js
import styled, { css } from "styled-components"
import SearchResult from "./search-result"

const Popover = css`
  max-height: 80vh;
  overflow: scroll;
  -webkit-overflow-scrolling: touch;
  position: absolute;
  z-index: 2;
  right: 0;
  top: 100%;
  margin-top: 0.5em;
  width: 80vw;
  max-width: 30em;
  box-shadow: 0 0 5px 0;
  padding: 1em;
  border-radius: 2px;
  background: ${({ theme }) => theme.background};
`

export default styled(SearchResult)`
  display: ${props => (props.show ? `block` : `none`)};
  ${Popover}

  .HitCount {
    display: flex;
    justify-content: flex-end;
  }

  .Hits {
    ul {
      list-style: none;
      margin-left: 0;
    }

    li.ais-Hits-item {
      margin-bottom: 1em;

      a {
        color: ${({ theme }) => theme.foreground};

        h4 {
          margin-bottom: 0.2em;
        }
      }
    }
  }

  .ais-PoweredBy {
    display: flex;
    justify-content: flex-end;
    font-size: 80%;

    svg {
      width: 70px;
    }
  }
`
```

`Popover` creates a popover floating under the search box. The `show` property determines whether it is visible or not.

## Usage

> The search widget is now ready for use. It only needs to be placed somewhere in your project's layout. The obvious place is the `Header` component:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The search widget is now ready for use. It needs to be placed somewhere in your project's layout. The most common place is the `Header` component:
```

```jsx:title=src/components/header.js
...
import { Link } from "gatsby"
import PropTypes from "prop-types"
import React from "react"
// highlight-start
import Search from "./search"

const searchIndices = [
  { name: `Pages`, title: `Pages` },
]
// highlight-end
const Header = ({ siteTitle }) => (
  <header
    style={{
      background: `rebeccapurple`,
      marginBottom: `1.45rem`,
    }}
  >
    <div
      style={{
        margin: `0 auto`,
        maxWidth: 960,
        padding: `1.45rem 1.0875rem`,
      }}
    >
      <h1 style={{ margin: 0 }}>
        <Link
          to="/"
          style={{
            color: `white`,
            textDecoration: `none`,
          }}
        >
          {siteTitle}
        </Link>
      </h1>

      // highlight-next-line
      <Search indices={searchIndices} />
    </div>
  </header>
)
```

> If you started from a different project your header file will look different; the highlighted lines show which lines need to be added.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you started from a different project your header file may look different; the highlighted lines show which lines need to be added.
```

Note that this is where you define the search indices you wish to search. They are passed as a property to `Search`.

## Running

> That's it! Running `gatsby develop` should now give you a working search that looks something like this:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Running `gatsby develop` should now give you a working search that looks something like this:
```

Author: Haha, I added this after reading something in the guidelines about including encouraging language and I thought it all sounded a bit dry, but I certainly don't mind removing it again, because I do prefer a more matter-of-fact presentation.

![Search widget displaying search results](./images/algolia-final-search.png)

> You can also play around with it [here](https://janosh.io/blog).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can also play around with it at [https://janosh.io/blog](https://janosh.io/blog).
```
